"On the Analysis of Randomized Load Balancing Schemes"
Michael Mitzenmacher
Note #1998-001, February 8, 1998.

It is well known that simple randomized load balancing schemes can
balance load effectively while incurring only a small overhead, making
such schemes appealing for practical systems. In this paper, we
provide new analyses for several such dynamic randomized load
balancing schemes.  

Our work extends a previous analysis of the supermarket model, a
model that abstracts a simple, efficient load balancing scheme in the
setting where jobs arrive at a large system of parallel processors.
In this model, customers arrive at a system of n servers as a
Poisson stream of rate lambda n, lambda < 1, with service
requirements exponentially distributed with mean 1.  Each customer
chooses d servers independently and uniformly at random from the n
servers, and is served according to the First In First Out (FIFO)
protocol at the choice with the fewest customers.  For the supermarket
model, it has been shown that using d = 2 choices yields an
exponential improvement in the expected time a customer spends in the
system over d = 1 choice (simple random selection) in equilibrium.
Here we examine several variations, including constant service times
and threshold models, where a customer makes up to d
successive choices until finding one below a set threshold.  

Our approach involves studying limiting, deterministic models
representing the behavior of these systems as the number of servers
n goes to infinity.  Results of our work include useful general
theorems for showing that these deterministic systems are stable or
converge exponentially to fixed points.  We also demonstrate that
allowing customers two choices instead of just one leads to
exponential improvements in the expected time a customer spends in the
system in several of the related models we study, reinforcing the concept
that just two choices yields significant power in load balancing.




