"PixelVision Architecture"
Brian Kelleher. Foreword by Bob McNamara
Note #1998-013. October 23, 1992. (Foreword October 15, 1998)

Foreword

Since the mid-1980's, the field of 3D computer graphics has enjoyed
tremendous growth, but outside of academia much of the work has
remained largely unpublished.  Highly competitive pressures seem to
have created an environment in which companies are reluctant to
publish design details of their work, fearing (perhaps justifiably)
that exposing their proprietary technology might erode some
competitive advantage.  This environment may have benefited
individual companies, but the community as a whole now suffers from
the scarcity of published work.

At the 1998 Eurographics/SIGGRAPH Workshop on Graphics Hardware, the
paper "Neon: A Single-Chip 3D Workstation Graphics Accelerator" won
praise from reviewers with comments such as: "This work 
should be seen by the community.  We don't get enough
papers describing the choices behind a significant project
involving tens of man years" and "While most of the ideas
described in this paper are not new,
many of the ideas are not previously documented."

Neon borrowed architectural features from 3D accelerators developed
at Digital Equipment Corporation's MIPS-based workstation product
engineering group in Palo Alto.  Formed in the mid to late 1980s,
the group had close ties with the company's research labs in Palo
Alto; indeed, several of the group's founding members came directly
from those research labs.

The PixelStamp project, begun in the late 1980s, was the group's
first generation of 3D graphics accelerators.  The PixelVision project,
begun in the early 1990s, was the group's second generation of 3D
graphics accelerators.  In 1992 most of the Palo Alto workstation
group was disbanded, though the PixelVision project was continued.

The ideas behind Neon's triangle setup and rasterization were borrowed
from the PixelVision project.  The PixelVision architecture was documented
in a 1992 manual by Brian Kelleher which was classified as company
confidential.  We are now declassifying and making "PixelVision Architecture"
publicly available to better acknowledge the source of ideas used 
in Neon.  

The author, Brian Kelleher, currently serves as Vice President of US
Research and Development at 3Dlabs.  Brian has more than 15 years of
management and engineering experience designing 3D graphics
products, during which time he is credited with 7 design patents.
He was one of six founders of Dynamic Pictures, which was acquired
by 3Dlabs in July 1998, and provided the leadership and vision for
the company's new product development.  Prior to starting Dynamic
Pictures, Brian was the head graphics designer for Digital Equipment
Corporation's MIPS-based development team on the West Coast of the
United States in the late 1980s and early 1990s.  Brian served as
Dynamic Pictures' CEO from November 1993 when the company was
founded until October 1997, at which point he became the Executive
Vice President of Engineering and Chief Technology Officer.

Bob McNamara

October 15, 1998
