
"In Memoriam: J.C.R. Licklider  1915-1990"

August 7, 1990

In the 1960s, J.C.R. Licklider published his ideas about the future role 
of multiaccess interactive computing. He looked beyond the existing 
limitations of punched cards and paper tape to a time when computers would 
interact in real time with the human user. By performing numerous routine 
tasks on demand, computers could contribute to a person's ability to 
formulate new insights and decisions. He saw man-computer interaction 
as enhancing both the quality and efficiency of human problem solving. 
 
Articulating his vision was an important contribution in challenging people 
to examine the implications of an emerging technology. But through his 
work for the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), he was also able 
to give his vision reality. The projects sponsored by his program provided 
the research direction for computer science in this country for many 
subsequent years.  Furthermore, his program was the first to provide 
the significant public funding necessary to guarantee the financial 
stability on which long-term research depended. 

Perhaps his most important influence, however, was in the area of computer 
science education. Prior to his work at ARPA, there were no departments 
in US universities offering a PhD in computer science. His program sponsored 
research at four of the first universities to offer graduate computer 
science degrees. These departments in turn provided role models for other 
departments that followed.

J.C.R. Licklider thus played a central role in initiating and sustaining 
computer science research and education in this country. To commemorate 
his important contributions, we reprint here two of his papers, "Man-Computer 
Symbiosis" and "The Computer as a Communication Device."  In recognition of 
the debt owed to him by the whole computer science profession, and by every 
user of interactive computing, we dedicate this report in his memory.




